# Data-Warehouse-Project  


## Project Datasets
* Song data: 's3://udacity-dend/song_data'  
* Log data: 's3://udacity-dend/log_data'  
### Song Dataset  
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
### Log Dataset  
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
The log files in the dataset will be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```
## Fact Table  
1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
    * songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent  
## Dimension Tables  

2. users - users in the app  
   * user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level  
3. songs - songs in music database    
   * song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration  
4. artists - artists in music database   
   * artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude  
5. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units  
   * start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday  
  
## Project Template
1. `create_table.py` is where I created the fact and dimension tables and staging tables for the star schema in Redshift.  
2. `etl.py` is where I loaded data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then processed that data into the analytics tables on Redshift.  
3. `sql_queries.py` is where I defined SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above.    
4. `README.md` is where I provided the discussion on my process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.  

## Project Steps
Below are steps you that I followed to complete each component of this project.

#### Creating Table Schemas
1. Designed schemas for the fact and dimension tables
2. Wrote a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in `sql_queries.py`
3. Wrote SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of `create_tables.py` if the tables already exist. 
4. Launched a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
5. Added redshift database and IAM role info to `dwh.cfg`.
#### Building ETL Pipeline
1. Tested by running `etl.py` after running `create_tables.py` and running the analytic queries on my Redshift database to compare my results with the expected results.
2. Deleted my redshift cluster when finished.

## How to run scripts

Set environment variables `KEY` and `SECRET`.

Choose `DB/DB_PASSWORD` in `dhw.cfg`.

Create IAM role, Redshift cluster, connect to S3 bucket and configure TCP connectivity  

Drop and recreate tables

```bash
$ python create_tables.py
```

Run ETL pipeline

```bash
$ python etl.py
```  

Validate the table
* Open the Amazon Redshift and use the database info to make a connection.  


Delete IAM role and Redshift cluster
